we alluded to the fact that Canada let's
say is woefully unprepared now on the
classic military front also with regard
to all the new forms of warfare that are
multiplying faster than people can even
imagine that we have a widespread
problem of demoralization and that
recruitment is not working okay so but I
didn't get the sense that we did a
sufficiently good job of telling
Canadians that you know there's smoke
and fire it's like that this is a real
problem and so like what do you feel are
the
consequences even the short-term
consequences let's say of Canada
continuing to be unprepared in this
manner so this goes to Mike's
intervention early in the conversation
about this notion of a perfect storm so
at the very moment at in time that this
period in time when we have the the
dimensions of the crisis that you've
just summarized we are incapable
therefore of participating contributing
and doing our fair share for lack of a
better
characterization in a global system that
needs us right so we look competent to
at minimum what so at a minimum we look
incompetent or disinterested pick one
neither of them is a particularly good
look for a G7 country yeah right right
then we have the actual
practical challenges around the security
issues we look at our ability to
contribute or not to the alliance are we
doing enough we never are doing enough
we're doing what we can but that is
insufficient um and so the implication
from a Canadian perspective is that
Canada that
depends as much if not more than many
other countries in the world on these
Global Systems for our way of life is
unable to make any meaningful
contribution to the preservation
reinforcement and ultimately protection
of all of these systems right right and
so but that's a hard cell and I get why
it's a hard cell which is why and this
is a very
personal plea I do not believe not
withstanding the need for Canadians to
understand this that this should be an
interest of or this should be an issue
of public interest or public opinion and
I have told political leaders who will
listen to me that if you are following
public opinion on these issues you are
not leading and this is an issue of my
susp too is that if the public was
informed as we're attempting to do now
that the discovery would be that far
more Canadians especially of the
conservative and classic liberal bent
would be behind intelligent intelligent
policy related to the military I can
only you know 100% support what Mark's
saying if a government wants to govern
for Canada for all Canadians and this is
the right thing to do to have armed
forces that can protect Canadians but
also intervene in in internationally
wherever we want you need to be able to
spend the money some social programs are
going to have to be lessened you know in
terms of of how much we spend on them
but it's always you know guns butter you
can have both and right now we don't
enough guns frankly that's that's where
we are today or people holding guns
holding or but or butter yeah but but
the point is and I agree with you 100%
as well that if a government decided
that then it's a matter of going out and
telling Canadians it has to start at the
top though again I say the Prime
Minister when he of our country doesn't
matter what persuasion he is you know
doesn't even talk about it when we talk
he talks about the defense policy update
it's going to be good it's going to get
closer to 2% no one cares about that for
the moment we need somebody who cares
about service to our country who's going
to make service an honorable thing for
people to do who's going to fund the
military who's going to improve morale
and so on and I think if you explain it
to Canadians they will understand yeah I
think and we need the leaders themselves
the ones in uniform are GNA have
to buck buck up a little bit can I say
that I was going to say something else
but I'll say grow up there but I'm not
gonna say that okay fair enough okay so
so why is why all right now we talked at
the begin a little bit about the fact
that look I know that the military
personnel the leadership in particular
are fundamentally supposed to shut the
hell up about political matters and they
are in a very strict chain of command
and by and large they should stay there
but you three who should know have
indicated that we have something on our
hands at in the order of a crisis and I
I don't imagine you're like Chicken
Little sky falling sort of people and so
at some point it becomes incumbent on
people who are attempting to serve the
country to bring such things to the
attention of Canadians and so why why is
that not happening as much as it might
in Europe well I think that again I I
you know not political but I think that
our our military like I I watched on
television in the last few years where
there's an announcement about the
military and Wayne A's not even there
our chief of Defense staff is not it's
it's Anita Nan that's making the
announcement the minist make the
announcement beside the Prime Minister
what the hell like you know you look at
the Americans and there's the The Joint
Chiefs the chairman of the Joint Chiefs
he's there beside them or that indicates
so so I think that I think that I don't
know maybe the generals are going to
need to say okay like you know no this
is still my ship my my armed forces and
I need to have more of a say and and I
don't know I I think the next government
that's going to be more likely because
this government just seemed to find the
idea of a uniform somehow unsavory and
hid it away I mean when was the last
time that the uniform I might say but
when was the last time you saw a rick
hiler for example up there calling them
scumbags and whatever else and him
saying yeah well you know you can talk
to the and and people listening
Canadians were enamored of that and you
need to Hero everybody loves a hero and
and we're not producing enough we're not
show we have Heroes but we're not
showing them enough then on that front
too like you talked about three
gentlemen whose careers were demolished
um senior officers McDonald Danny forant
and Steve whan right and the name of
culture change and so my suspicions are
that that sort of action is also quite
likely to dissuade people from having
something to say I it probably well I I
I'm not sure about that I we an example
and I'll talk about you know vice
admiral octone and vice admiral topi two
senior you know three star Admirals um
topi commands the Navy currently and he
made a video about I want to say about a
year ago maybe nine months ago where he
talked about the challenges of the Navy
now as a leader that's what you want to
do you want to inform your troops you
want to make sure you communicate with
them that okay things are tough boys and
girls but you know there's there's stuff
coming down the pipe and you know he did
what a good leader would do I'm sure the
government was very unhappy with him
releasing that video If you haven't seen
it you need to see it the other guy is
uh is uh octone so what's the video the
video is the Royal Canadian Navy
commander makes a video about the state
of the Navy today how long is that video
I think 6 minutes maybe 6 minutes but
it's excellent It's will you send me the
link to that maybe we'll put it on this
show sure I can if that would be useful
sure I can do it um the other guy is is
Bob oone so he commands He commands the
Canadian joint Operations Command He
commands all the military operations
outside and inside the country he's kind
of the Mr operator he does that on
behalf of the chief of Defense staff so
he he was in an interview I don't know
with who but he he met he talked about
you know the world today and he talked
about because he's the guy gets all the
intelligence and and he talked about the
dangers the threats to our country and
so on and so forth and he was very open
and he said you know Canadians don't
realize how dangerous the world is today
that was another video or that is an
inter MRE mainstream media interview uh
in one of the papers I believe but the
notion being that there are little
pockets uhuh of people who speak
speaking out and I was always told I
don't know if you same with you but when
you when the media would come around and
they would say can we talk to your
soldiers the soldiers knew they could
talk about what they were doing exactly
what they you couldn't talk about oh I
hate the policy of the government on
this you know and frankly when I look at
what topi did and I look at what OCT
Looney did they talked about their job
they talked you know my job is the
operator and I my job is to know what's
going on in the world and I don't think
people understand that this is going on
the other guy toi he said well what's
going on in my command I'm telling you
troops and I sure he did it for his
Sailors he did it was and it was really
good so so your point is is that there
is a way for military leaders to speak
out is to inform the PO population and
their own men and women about what's
going on without becoming without
stepping outside of the chain of
Commander be exact loyalty is the key
right however the government sometimes
says no yeah you're not allow well the
government can also be pushed back when
they're out of their B so but your your
sense is that there is a there is a
place there where public pronouncements
are appropriate and possible and that
you've seen some of them yeah I have
yeah yeah okay
[Music]